<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="no-js" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Essentials of Sociology</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"></meta>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0, maximum-scale=1.0"></meta>
<link rel="stylesheet" media="all" href="../styles/Styles.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" media="all" href="../styles/style.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" media="all" href="../styles/layout.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" media="all" href="../styles/skeleton.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" media="all" href="../styles/tipped.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" media="all" href="../styles/jquery.custombox.css"></link>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/fancybox/jquery.fancybox.css" type="text/css" media="screen" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/panzoom.css" type="text/css" media="screen" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/tipped.css" type="text/css" />

<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/jquery-1.8.2.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/06_master.js"></script> 
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/tipped.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/master.js"></script>

<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/jquery-1.11.1.min.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/jquery-ui-1.11.0.min.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/fancybox/jquery.fancybox.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/fancybox/jquery.fancybox.pack.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/image_zoom.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/panzoom.js"></script>

<script>
$(document).ready(function () {

$('.fadein').on('click', function ( e ) {
$.fn.custombox( this, {
effect: 'fadein'
});
e.preventDefault();
});

});

</script>

<style type="text/css">
.myCustomClassWithBgPNG {
width: 20px;
height: 20px;
position: relative;
left: 97%;
top: -10px;
background-image: url("../images/close-yellow.png") !important;
background-position: center !important;
background-repeat: no-repeat !important;
}
</style>

<link type="text/css" href="../../../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" /></head>
<body>
<div class="container">
<div class="innercontainer">
<p class="BM_BMH"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A1"></span>glossary</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">absolute poverty</span><span class="bold"></span> <span class="bold">•</span> The minimal requirements necessary to sustain a healthy existence.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">activity theory </span><span class="bold">•</span> A functionalist theory of aging, which holds that busy, engaged people are more likely to lead fulfilling and productive lives.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">age-grades </span><span class="bold">•</span> The system found in small traditional cultures by which people belonging to a similar age group are categorized together and hold similar rights and obligations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">ageism </span><span class="bold">•</span> Discrimination or prejudice against a person on the grounds of age.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">agency </span><span class="bold">•</span> The ability to think, act, and make choices independently.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">agents of socialization </span><span class="bold">•</span> Groups or social contexts within which processes of socialization take place.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">aging </span><span class="bold">•</span> The combination of biological, psychological, and social processes that affect people as they grow older.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">agrarian societies </span><span class="bold">•</span> Societies whose means of subsistence are based on agricultural production (crop growing).</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">alienation </span><span class="bold">•</span> The sense that our own abilities as human beings are taken over by other entities. The term was originally used by Karl Marx to refer to the projection of human powers onto gods. Subsequently he used the term to refer to the loss of workers’ control over the nature and products of their labor.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">anomie </span><span class="bold">•</span> A concept first brought into wide usage in sociology by Durkheim, referring to a situation in which social norms lose their hold over individual behavior.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">assimilation </span><span class="bold">•</span> The acceptance of a minority group by a majority population, in which the new group takes on the values and norms of the dominant culture.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">authority </span><span class="bold">•</span> A government’s legitimate use of power.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">automation</span><span class="bold"></span> <span class="bold">•</span> Production processes monitored and controlled by machines with only minimal supervision from people.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">biological determinism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The belief that differences we observe between groups of people, such as men and women, are explained wholly by biological causes.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">biomedical model of health</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The set of principles underpinning Western medical systems and practices. The biomedical model of health defines diseases objectively, in accordance with the presence of recognized symptoms, and holds that the healthy body can be restored through scientifically based medical treatment. The human body is likened to a machine that can be returned to working order with the proper repairs.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">black feminism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A strand of feminist theory that highlights the multiple disadvantages of gender, class, and race that shape the experiences of nonwhite women. Black feminists reject the idea of a single, unified gender oppression that is experienced evenly by all women and argue that early feminist analysis reflected the specific concerns of white, middle-class women.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">blue- and pink-collar jobs</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Jobs that typically pay low wages and often involve <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A2"></span>manual or low-skill labor. Blue-collar jobs typically are held by men (e.g., factory worker), whereas pink-collar jobs are typically held by women (e.g., clerical assistant).</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">bourgeoisie</span> <span class="bold">•</span> People who own companies, land, or stocks (shares) and use these to generate economic returns, according to Marx.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">broken windows theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A theory proposing that even small acts of crime, disorder, and vandalism can threaten a neighborhood and render it unsafe.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">bureaucracy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A type of organization marked by a clear hierarchy of authority and the existence of written rules of procedure and staffed by full-time, salaried officials.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">capitalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An economic system based on the private ownership of wealth, which is invested and reinvested in order to produce profit.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">caste society</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A society in which different social levels are closed, so that all individuals must remain at the social level of their birth throughout life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">caste system</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A social system in which one’s social status is determined at birth and set for life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">church</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A large, established religious body, normally having a formal, bureaucratic structure and a hierarchy of religious officials. The term is also used to refer to the place in which religious ceremonies are carried out.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">citizen</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A member of a political community, having both rights and duties associated with that membership.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">civil inattention</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process whereby individuals in the same physical setting demonstrate to each another that they are aware of the other’s presence.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">civil rights</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Legal rights held by all citizens in a given national community.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">civil society</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The realm of activity that lies between the state and the market, including the family, schools, community associations, and other noneconomic institutions. Civil society, or civic culture, is essential to vibrant democratic societies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">class</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Although it is one of the most frequently used concepts in sociology, there is no clear agreement about how the term should be defined. Most sociologists use the term to refer to socioeconomic variations among groups of individuals that create variations in their material prosperity and power.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">clock time</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Time as measured by the clock, in terms of hours, minutes, and seconds. Before the invention of clocks, time reckoning was based on events in the natural world, such as the rising and setting of the sun.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">cognition</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Human thought processes involving perception, reasoning, and remembering.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">cohabitation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Two people living together in a sexual relationship of some permanence without being married to each other.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">collective bargaining</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The rights of employees and workers to negotiate with their employers for basic rights and benefits.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">colonialism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process whereby Western nations established their rule in parts of the world away from their home territories.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">communism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A set of political ideas associated with Marx, as developed particularly by Lenin and institutionalized in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and some developing countries.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">community policing</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A renewed emphasis on crime prevention rather than law enforcement to reintegrate policing within the community.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">comparable worth</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Policies that attempt to remedy the gender pay gap by adjusting pay so that those in female-dominated jobs are not paid less for equivalent work.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">comparative questions</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Questions concerned with drawing comparisons among different human societies for the purposes of sociological theory or research.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">comparative research</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Research that compares one set of findings on one society with the same type of findings on other societies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A diverse set of approaches and therapies for treating different illnesses and promoting well-being that generally falls outside of standard medical practices.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">compulsion of proximity</span> <span class="bold">•</span> People’s need to interact with others in their presence.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">concrete operational stage</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A stage of human cognitive development, as formulated by Jean Piaget, in which the child’s thinking is based primarily on physical perception of the world. In this phase, the child is not yet capable of dealing with abstract concepts or hypothetical situations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">conflict theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Argument that deviance is deliberately chosen and often political in nature.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">constitutional monarchs</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Kings or queens who are largely figureheads. Real power rests in the hands of other political leaders.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">continuity theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Theoretical perspective on aging that specifies that older adults fare best when they participate in activities consistent with their personality, preferences, and activities earlier in life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">control theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A theory that views crime as the outcome of an imbalance between impulses toward criminal activity and controls that deter it. Control theorists hold that criminals are rational beings who will act to maximize their own reward unless they are rendered unable to do so through either social or physical controls.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">conurbation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An agglomeration of towns or cities into an unbroken urban environment.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">conversation analysis</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The empirical study of conversations, employing techniques drawn from ethnomethodology. Conversation analysis examines details of naturally occurring conversations to reveal the organizational principles of talk and its role in the production and reproduction of social order.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">core countries</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to world-systems theory, the most advanced industrial countries, which take the lion’s share of profits in the world economic system.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">corporate crime</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Offenses committed by large corporations in society, including pollution, false advertising, and violations of health and safety regulations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">corporate culture</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An organizational culture involving rituals, events, or traditions that are unique to a specific company.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">corporations</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Business firms or companies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">correlation coefficient</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A measure of the degree of correlation between variables.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">created environment</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Constructions established by human beings to serve their needs, derived from the use of man-made technology—including, for example, roads, railways, factories, offices, private homes, and other buildings.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A3"></span><span class="bold">crime</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Any action that contravenes the laws established by a political authority. Although we may think of criminals as a distinct subsection of the population, there are few people who have not broken the law in one way or another during their lives. While laws are formulated by state authorities, it is not unknown for those authorities to engage in criminal behavior in certain situations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">crude birthrate</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A statistical measure representing the number of births within a given population per year, normally calculated as the number of births per 1,000 members. Although the crude birthrate is a useful index, it is only a general measure, because it does not specify numbers of births in relation to age distribution.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">crude death rate</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A statistical measure representing the number of deaths that occur annually in a given population per year, normally calculated as the number of deaths per 1,000 members. Crude death rates give a general indication of the mortality levels of a community or society, but are limited in their usefulness because they do not take into account the age distribution.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">cult</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A fragmentary religious grouping to which individuals are loosely affiliated but which lacks any permanent structure.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">cultural capital</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Noneconomic or cultural resources that parents pass down to their children, such as language or knowledge. These resources contribute to the process of social reproduction, according to Bourdieu.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">cultural relativism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The practice of judging a society by its own standards.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">cultural universals</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Values or modes of behavior shared by all human cultures.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">culture</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The values, norms, and material goods characteristic of a given group. Like the concept of society, the notion of culture is widely used in sociology and the other social sciences (particularly anthropology). Culture is one of the most distinctive properties of human social association.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">culture of poverty</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The thesis, popularized by Oscar Lewis, that poverty is not a result of individual inadequacies but is instead the outcome of a larger social and cultural atmosphere into which successive generations of children are socialized. The culture of poverty refers to the values, beliefs, lifestyles, habits, and traditions that are common among people living under conditions of material deprivation.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">data</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Factual information used as a basis for reasoning, discussion, or calculation. Social science data often refer to individuals’ responses to survey questions.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">debriefing</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Following a research study, the investigator will inform study participants about the true purpose of the study, and will reveal any deception that happened during the study.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">degree of dispersal</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The range or distribution of a set of figures.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">democracy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A political system that allows the citizens to participate in political decision making or to elect representatives to government bodies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">democratic elitism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A theory of the limits of democracy, which holds that in large-scale societies democratic participation is necessarily limited to the regular election of political leaders.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">demographic transition</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An interpretation of population change, which holds that a stable ratio of births to deaths is achieved once a certain level of economic prosperity has been reached. According to this notion, in preindustrial societies there is a rough balance between births and deaths, because population increase is kept in check by a lack of available food, by disease, or by war. In modern societies, by contrast, population equilibrium is achieved because families are moved by economic incentives to limit the number of children.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">demography</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The study of the size, distribution, and composition of populations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">denomination</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A religious sect that has lost its revivalist dynamism and become an institutionalized body, commanding the adherence of significant numbers of people.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">dependency culture</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A term popularized by Charles Murray to describe individuals who rely on state welfare provision rather than entering the labor market. The dependency culture is seen as the outcome of the “paternalistic” welfare state that undermines individual ambition and people’s capacity for self-help.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">dependency ratio</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The ratio of people of dependent ages (children and the elderly) to people of economically active ages.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">dependency theories</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Marxist theories of economic development arguing that the poverty of low-income countries stems directly from their exploitation by wealthy countries and the multinational corporations that are based in wealthy countries.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">developing world</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The less-developed societies, in which industrial production is either virtually nonexistent or only developed to a limited degree. The majority of the world’s population live in less-developed countries.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">developmental questions</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Questions that sociologists pose when looking at the origins and path of development of social institutions from the past to the present.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">deviance</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Modes of action that do not conform to the norms or values held by most members of a group or society. What is regarded as deviant is as variable as the norms and values that distinguish different cultures and subcultures from one another. Forms of behavior that are highly esteemed by one group are regarded negatively by others.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">deviant subculture</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A subculture whose members hold values that differ substantially from those of the majority.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">diaspora</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The dispersal of an ethnic population from an original homeland into foreign areas, often in a forced manner or under traumatic circumstances.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">differential association</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An interpretation of the development of criminal behavior proposed by Edwin H. Sutherland, according to whom criminal behavior is learned through association with others who regularly engage in crime.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">direct democracy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A form of participatory democracy that allows citizens to vote directly on laws and policies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">discrimination</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Behavior that denies to the members of a particular group resources or rewards that can be obtained by others. Discrimination must be distinguished from prejudice: Individuals who are prejudiced against others may not engage in discriminatory practices against them; conversely, people may act in a discriminatory fashion toward a group even though they are not prejudiced against that group.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">disengagement theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A functionalist theory of aging that holds that it is functional for society to remove people from their traditional roles when they become elderly, thereby freeing up those roles for others.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A4"></span><span class="bold">displacement</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The transferring of ideas or emotions from their true source to another object.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">division of labor</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The specialization of work tasks, by means of which different occupations are combined within a production system. All societies have at least some rudimentary form of division of labor, especially between the tasks allocated to men and those performed by women. With the development of industrialism, the division of labor became vastly more complex than in any prior type of production system. In the modern world, the division of labor is international in scope.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">dominant group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The opposite of a minority group; the dominant group possesses more wealth, power, and prestige in a society.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">doubling time</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The time it takes for a particular level of population to double.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">downward mobility</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Social mobility in which individuals’ wealth, income, or status is lower than what they or their parents once had.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">dyad</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group consisting of two persons.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">ecological approach</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A perspective on urban analysis emphasizing the “natural” distribution of city neighborhoods into areas having contrasting characteristics.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">economic interdependence</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The fact that in the division of labor, individuals depend on others to produce many or most of the goods they need to sustain their lives.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">economy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The system of production and exchange that provides for the material needs of individuals living in a given society. Economic institutions are of key importance in all social orders. What goes on in the economy usually influences other areas in social life. Modern economies differ substantially from traditional ones, because the majority of the population is no longer engaged in agricultural production.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">egocentric</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to Jean Piaget, the characteristic quality of a child during the early years of his or her life. Egocentric thinking involves understanding objects and events in the environment solely in terms of the child’s own position.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">emerging economies</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Developing countries that over the past two or three decades have begun to develop a strong industrial base, such as Singapore and Hong Kong.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">emigration</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The movement of people out of one country in order to settle in another.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">empirical investigation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Factual inquiry carried out in any area of sociological study.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">encounter</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A meeting between two or more people in a situation of face-to-face interaction. Our daily lives can be seen as a series of different encounters strung out across the course of the day. In modern societies, many of these encounters are with strangers rather than people we know.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">endogamy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The forbidding of marriage or sexual relations outside one’s social group.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">entrepreneur</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The owner or founder of a business firm.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">environmental ecology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A concern with preserving the integrity of the physical environment in the face of the impact of modern industry and technology.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">ethnicity</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Cultural values and norms that distinguish the members of a given group from others. An ethnic group is one whose members share a distinct awareness of a common cultural identity, separating them from other groups. In virtually all societies, ethnic differences are associated with variations in power and material wealth. Where ethnic differences are also racial, such divisions are sometimes especially pronounced.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">ethnocentrism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The tendency to look at other cultures through the eyes of one’s own culture, and thereby misrepresent them.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">ethnography</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The firsthand study of people using participant observation or interviewing.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">ethnomethodology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The study of how people make sense of what others say and do in the course of day-to-day social interaction. Ethnomethodology is concerned with the “ethnomethods” by which people sustain meaningful exchanges with one another.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">experiment</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A research method in which variables can be analyzed in a controlled and systematic way, either in an artificial situation constructed by the researcher or in naturally occurring settings.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">exponential growth</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A geometric, rather than linear, rate of increase. Populations tend to grow exponentially.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">extended family</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A family group consisting of more than two generations of relatives.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">external risk</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Dangers that spring from the natural world and are unrelated to the actions of humans. Examples of external risk include droughts, earthquakes, famines, and storms.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">exurban country</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A county that lies within a large metropolitan area but has less than 25 percent of its population in an urbanized area. Tends to sit at periphery of metropolitan areas.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">factual questions</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Questions that raise issues concerning matters of fact (rather than theoretical or moral issues).</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">family</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group of individuals related to one another by blood ties, marriage, or adoption, who form an economic unit, the adult members of which are often responsible for the upbringing of children. All known societies involve some form of family system, although the nature of family relationships varies widely. While in modern societies the main family form is the nuclear family, extended family relationships are also found.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">family capitalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Capitalistic enterprise owned and administered by entrepreneurial families.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">family of orientation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The family into which an individual is born or adopted.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">family of procreation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The family an individual initiates through marriage or by having children.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">fecundity</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A measure of the number of children that it is biologically possible for a woman to produce.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">feminism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Advocacy of the rights of women to be equal with men in all spheres of life. Feminism dates from the late eighteenth century in Europe, and feminist movements exist in most countries today.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">feminist theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A sociological perspective that emphasizes the centrality of gender in analyzing the social world and particularly the experiences of women. There are many strands of feminist theory, but they all share the intention to explain gender inequalities in society and to work to overcome them.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">feminization of poverty</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An increase in the proportion of the poor who are female.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">fertility</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The average number of live-born children produced by women of childbearing age in a particular society.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">focused interaction</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Interaction between individuals engaged in a common activity or in direct conversation with each another.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A5"></span><span class="bold">folkways</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A subtype of norm; they guide our casual or everyday interactions. Violations are sanctioned subtly or not at all.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">formal operational stage</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development at which the growing child becomes capable of handling abstract concepts and hypothetical situations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">formal organization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Means by which a group is rationally designed to achieve its objectives, often using explicit rules, regulations, and procedures.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">formal relations</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Relations that exist in groups and organizations, laid down by the norms, or rules, of the official system of authority.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">franchise</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The right to vote.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">functional literacy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Having reading and writing skills that are beyond a basic level and are sufficient to manage one’s everyday activities and employment tasks.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">functionalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A theoretical perspective based on the notion that social events can best be explained in terms of the functions they perform—that is, the contributions they make to the continuity of a society.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">gender</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Social expectations about behavior regarded as appropriate for the members of each sex. Gender refers not to the physical attributes distinguishing men and women but to socially formed traits of masculinity and femininity. The study of gender relations has become one of the most important areas of sociology in recent years.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">gender inequality</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The inequality between men and women in terms of wealth, income, and status.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">gender socialization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The learning of gender roles through social factors such as schooling, the media, and family.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">gender typing</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Designation of occupations as male or female, with “women’s” occupations, such as secretarial and retail positions, having lower status and pay, and “men’s” occupations, such as managerial and professional positions, having higher status and pay.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">generalized other</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A concept in the theory of George Herbert Mead, according to which the individual takes over the general values of a given group or society during the socialization process.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">genocide</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The systematic, planned destruction of a racial, political, or cultural group.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">gentrification</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A process of urban renewal in which older, deteriorated housing is refurbished by affluent people moving into the area.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">glass ceiling</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A promotion barrier that prevents a woman’s upward mobility within an organization.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">global city</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A city—such as London, New York, or Tokyo—that has become an organizing center of the new global economy.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">global commodity chain</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A worldwide network of labor and production processes yielding a finished product.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">global inequality</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The systematic differences in wealth and power among countries.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">globalization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The economic, political, and social interconnectedness of individuals and nations throughout the world.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">government</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The enacting of policies and decisions on the part of officials within a political apparatus. While in the past virtually all governments were headed by monarchs or emperors, in most modern societies governments are run by officials who do not inherit their positions of power but are elected or appointed on the basis of qualifications.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">groupthink</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A process by which the members of a group ignore ways of thinking and plans of action that go against the group consensus.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">hate crime</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A criminal act by an offender who is motivated by some bias, such as racism, sexism, or homophobia.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">heterosexuality</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Sexual or romantic attraction to persons of the opposite sex.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">hidden curriculum</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Traits of behavior or attitudes that are learned at school but not included within the formal curriculum—for example, gender differences.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">home schooling</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A growing trend (but a longtime practice) of parents or guardians educating their children at home, for religious, philosophical, or safety reasons.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">homosexuality</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Sexual or romantic attraction of persons of one’s own sex.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">housework</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Unpaid work carried on in the home, usually by women; domestic chores such as cooking, cleaning, and shopping. Also called domestic labor.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">human resource management</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A style of management that regards a company’s workforce as vital to its economic competitiveness.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">hypothesis</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An idea or a guess about a given state of affairs, put forward as a basis for empirical testing.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">ideal type</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A “pure type,” constructed by emphasizing certain traits of a social item that do not necessarily exist in reality. An example is Max Weber’s ideal type of bureaucratic organization.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">ideology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Shared ideas or beliefs that serve to justify the interests of dominant groups. Ideologies are found in all societies in which there are systematic and ingrained inequalities among groups. The concept of ideology connects closely with that of power, since ideological systems serve to legitimize the power that groups hold.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">immigration</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The movement of people into one country from another for the purpose of settlement.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">impression management</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Preparing for the presentation of one’s social role.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">income</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Payment, usually derived from wages, salaries, or investments.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">industrialization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The emergence of machine production, based on the use of inanimate power resources (such as steam or electricity).</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">industrialized societies</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Highly developed nation-states in which the majority of the population work in factories or offices rather than in agriculture, and most people live in urban areas.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">infant mortality rate</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The number of infants who die during the first year of life, per 1,000 live births.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">infanticide</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The intentional killing of a newborn. Female babies are more likely than male babies to be murdered in cultures that devalue women.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">informal economy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Economic transactions carried on outside the sphere of formal paid employment.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">informal networks</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Relations that exist in groups and organizations developed on the basis of personal connections; ways of doing things that depart from formally recognized modes of procedure.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">information society</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A society no longer based primarily on the production of material goods but on the production of knowledge. The notion of the information society is closely bound up with the rise of information technology.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">information technology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Forms of technology based on information processing and requiring microelectronic circuitry.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A6"></span><span class="bold">informed consent</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process whereby the study investigator informs potential participants about the risks and benefits involved in the research study. Informed consent must be obtained before an individual participates in a study.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">in-group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group toward which one feels particular loyalty and respect—the group to which “we” belong.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">inner city</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The areas composing the central neighborhoods of a city, as distinct from the suburbs. In many modern urban settings in industrialized nations inner-city areas are subject to dilapidation and decay, the more affluent residents having moved to outlying areas.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">instinct</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A fixed pattern of behavior that has genetic origins and that appears in all normal animals within a given species.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">institutional capitalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Capitalistic enterprise organized on the basis of institutional shareholding.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">institutional racism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Patterns of discrimination based on ethnicity that have become structured into existing social institutions.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">intelligence</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Level of intellectual ability, particularly as measured by IQ (intelligence quotient) tests.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">interactional vandalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The deliberate subversion of the tacit rules of conversation.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">interest group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group organized to pursue specific interests in the political arena, operating primarily by lobbying the members of legislative bodies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">intergenerational mobility</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Movement up or down a social stratification hierarchy from one generation to another.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">intragenerational mobility</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Movement up or down a social stratification hierarchy within the course of a personal career.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">IQ (intelligence quotient)</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A score attained on tests of symbolic or reasoning abilities.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">iron law of oligarchy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A term coined by Weber’s student Robert Michels meaning that large organizations tend toward centralization of power, making democracy difficult.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">kinship</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A relation that links individuals through blood ties, marriage, or adoption. Kinship relations are by definition part of marriage and the family, but extend much more broadly. While in most modern societies few social obligations are involved in kinship relations extending beyond the immediate family, in other cultures kinship is of vital importance to social life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">knowledge economy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A society no longer based primarily on the production of material goods but based instead on the production of knowledge. Its emergence has been linked to the development of a broad base of consumers who are technologically literate and have made new advances in computing, entertainment, and telecommunications part of their lives.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">knowledge society</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Another common term for information society—a society based on the production and consumption of knowledge and information.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">labeling theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An approach to the study of deviance that suggests that people become “deviant” because certain labels are attached to their behavior by political authorities and others.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">language</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The primary vehicle of meaning and communication in a society, language is a system of symbols that represent objects and abstract thoughts.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">latent functions</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Functional consequences that are not intended or recognized by the members of a social system in which they occur.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">law</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A rule of behavior established by a political authority and backed by state power.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">leader</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A person who is able to influence the behavior of other members of a group.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">liberal democracies</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A type of representative democracy in which elected representatives hold power.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">liberal feminism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Form of feminist theory that believes that gender inequality is produced by unequal access to civil rights and certain social resources, such as education and employment, based on sex. Liberal feminists tend to seek solutions through changes in legislation that ensure that the rights of individuals are protected.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">liberation theology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An activist Catholic religious movement that combines Catholic beliefs with a passion for social justice for the poor.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">life chances</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A term introduced by Max Weber to signify a person’s opportunities for achieving economic prosperity.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">life course</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The various transitions and stages people experience during their lives.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">life course theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A perspective based on the assumptions that the aging process is shaped by historical time and place. Individuals make choices that reflect both opportunities and constraints. Aging is a lifelong process, and the relationships, events, and experiences of early life have consequences for later life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">life expectancy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The number of years the average person can expect to live.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">life span</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The maximum length of life that is biologically possible for a member of a given species.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">linguistic relativity hypothesis</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A hypothesis, based on the theories of Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf, that perceptions are relative to language.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">literacy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The ability to read and write.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">local nationalisms</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The beliefs that communities that share a cultural identity should have political autonomy, even within smaller units of a nation-state.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">lower class</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A social class composed of those who work part time or not at all and whose household income is typically low.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">macrosociology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The study of large-scale groups, organizations, or social systems.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">Malthusianism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A doctrine about population dynamics developed by Thomas Malthus, according to which population increase comes up against “natural limits,” represented by famine and war.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">managerial capitalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Capitalistic enterprises administered by managerial executives rather than by owners.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">manifest functions</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The functions of a particular social activity that are known to and intended by the individuals involved in the activity.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">manufactured risk</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Dangers that are created by the impact of human knowledge and technology on the natural world. Examples of manufactured risk include global warming and genetically modified foods.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">market-oriented theories</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Theories about economic development that assume that the best possible economic consequences will result if individuals are free to make their own economic decisions, uninhibited by governmental constraint.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">marriage</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A socially approved sexual relationship between two individuals. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A7"></span>Through much of history, marriage involved two persons of opposite sexes, but in the past decade, same-sex couples have gained legal access to marriage in some parts of the world. Marriage normally forms the basis of a family of procreation—that is, it is expected that the married couple will produce and raise children. Some societies and subcultures permit polygamy, in which an individual may have more than one spouse at the same time.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">Marxism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A body of thought deriving its main elements from Karl Marx’s ideas.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">material goods</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The physical objects that a society creates; these influence the ways in which people live.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">materialist conception of history</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The view developed by Marx, according to which material, or economic, factors have a prime role in determining historical change.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">matrilocal family</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A family system in which the husband is expected to live near the wife’s parents.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">mean</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A statistical measure of central tendency, or average, based on dividing a total by the number of individual cases.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">means of production</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The means whereby the production of material goods is carried on in a society, including not just technology but the social relations among producers.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">measures of central tendency</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The ways of calculating averages.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">median</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The number that falls halfway in a range of numbers—a way of calculating central tendency that is sometimes more useful than calculating a mean.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">Medicare</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A program under the U.S. Social Security Administration that reimburses hospitals and physicians for medical care provided to qualifying people over sixty-five years old.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">megalopolis</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The “city of all cities” in ancient Greece—used in modern times to refer to very large conurbations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">melting pot</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The idea that ethnic differences can be combined to create new patterns of behavior drawing on diverse cultural sources.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">microsociology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The study of human behavior in contexts of face-to-face interaction.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">middle class</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A social class composed broadly of those working in white-collar and lower managerial occupations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">minority group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group of people who are in a minority in a given society and who, because of their distinct physical or cultural characteristics, find themselves in situations of inequality within that society. Also known as ethnic minority.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">mode</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The number that appears most often in a given set of data. This can sometimes be a helpful way of portraying central tendency.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">modernization theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A version of market-oriented development theory that argues that low-income societies develop economically only if they give up their traditional ways and adopt modern economic institutions, technologies, and cultural values that emphasize savings and productive investment.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">monogamy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A form of marriage in which each married partner is allowed only one spouse at any given time.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">monopoly</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A situation in which a single firm dominates in a given industry.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">mores</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A subtype of norm; they are widely adhered to and have great moral or social significance. Violations are generally sanctioned strongly.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">mortality</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The number of deaths in a population.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">multiculturalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The viewpoint according to which ethnic groups can exist separately and share equally in economic and political life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">nationalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A set of beliefs and symbols expressing identification with a national community.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">nation-state</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A particular type of state, characteristic of the modern world, in which a government has sovereign power within a defined territorial area, and the population are citizens who know themselves to be part of a single nation. Nation-states are closely associated with the rise of nationalism, although nationalist loyalties do not always conform to the boundaries of specific states. Nation-states developed as part of an emerging nation-state system, originating in Europe; in current times, they span the whole globe.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">neoliberalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The economic belief that free-market forces, achieved by minimizing government restrictions on business, provide the only route to economic growth.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">network</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A set of informal and formal social ties that links people to one another.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">new criminology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A branch of criminological thought, prominent in Great Britain in the 1970s, that regarded deviance as deliberately chosen and often political in nature. The new criminologists argued that crime and deviance could be understood only in the context of power and inequality within society.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">new-style terrorism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A recent form of terrorism characterized by global ambitions, loose global organizational ties, and a more ruthless attitude toward the violence the terrorists are willing to use.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">nonverbal communication</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Communication between individuals based on facial expression or bodily gestures rather than on language.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">norms</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Rules of conduct that specify appropriate behavior in a given range of social situations. A norm either prescribes a given type of behavior or forbids it. All human groups follow norms, which are always backed by sanctions of one kind or another— varying from informal disapproval to physical punishment.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">nuclear family</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A family group consisting of an adult or adult couple and their dependent children.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">obesity</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Excessive body weight indicated by a body mass index (BMI) over 30.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">occupation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Any form of paid employment in which an individual regularly works.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">old old</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Sociological term for persons between the ages of seventy-five and eighty-four.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">oldest old</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Sociological term for persons age eighty-five and older.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">old-style terrorism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A type of terrorism that is local and linked to particular states and has limited objectives, which means that the violence involved is fairly limited.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">oligarchy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Rule by a small minority within an organization or society.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">oligopoly</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The domination of a small number of firms in a given industry.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">oral history</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Interviews with people about events they witnessed or experienced at some point earlier in their lives.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">organic solidarity</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to Émile Durkheim, the social cohesion that results from the various parts of a society functioning as an integrated whole.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">organization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A large group of individuals with a definite set of authority relations. Many types of organizations exist in industrialized societies, influencing <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A8"></span>most aspects of our lives. While not all organizations are bureaucratic, there are close links between the development of organizations and bureaucratic tendencies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">organized crime</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Criminal activities carried out by organizations established as businesses.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">out-group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group toward which one feels antagonism and contempt—”those people.”</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">pariah groups</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Groups that suffer from negative status discrimination—they are looked down on by most other members of society. The Jews, for example, have been a pariah group throughout much of European history.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">participant observation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A method of research widely used in sociology and anthropology in which the researcher takes part in the activities of the group or community being studied. Also called fieldwork.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">participatory democracy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A system of democracy in which all members of a group or community participate collectively in making major decisions.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">pastoral societies</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Societies whose subsistence derives from the rearing of domesticated animals.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">patriarchy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The dominance of men over women. All known societies are patriarchal, although there are variations in the degree and nature of the power men exercise, as compared with women. One of the prime objectives of women’s movements in modern societies is to combat existing patriarchal institutions.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">patrilocal family</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A family system in which the wife is expected to live near the husband’s parents.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">peer group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A friendship group composed of individuals of similar age and social status.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">peripheral countries</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Countries that have a marginal role in the world economy and are thus dependent on the core producing societies for their trading relationships.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">personal space</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The physical space individuals maintain between themselves and others.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">personal troubles</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Difficulties that are located in individual biographies and their immediate milieu, a seemingly private experience.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">personality stabilization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to the theory of functionalism, the family plays a crucial role in assisting its adult members emotionally. Marriage between adults is the arrangement through which adult personalities are supported and kept healthy.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">pilot study</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A trial run in survey research.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">pluralism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A model for ethnic relations in which all ethnic groups in a society retain their independent and separate identities, yet share equally in the rights and powers of citizenship.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">pluralist theories of modern democracy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Theories that emphasize the role of diverse and potentially competing interest groups, none of which dominate the political process.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">political rights</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Rights of political participation, such as the right to vote in local and national elections, held by citizens of a national community.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">politics</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The means by which power is employed to influence the nature and content of governmental activities. The sphere of the political includes the activities of those in government, but also the actions of others. There are many ways in which people outside the governmental apparatus seek to influence it.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">polyandry</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A form of marriage in which a woman may have two or more husbands simultaneously.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">polygamy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A form of marriage in which a person may have two or more spouses simultaneously.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">polygyny</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A form of marriage in which a man may have two or more wives simultaneously.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">postindustrial society</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A postindustrial society is based on the production of information rather than material goods. According to postindustrialists, we are currently experiencing a series of social changes as profound as those that initiated the industrial era some 200 years ago.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">postmodernism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The belief that society is no longer governed by history or progress. Postmodern society is highly pluralistic and diverse, with no “grand narrative” guiding its development.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">poverty line</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An official government measure to define those living in poverty in the United States.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">power</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The ability of individuals or the members of a group to achieve aims or further the interests they hold. Power is a pervasive element in all human relationships. Many conflicts in society are struggles over power, because how much power an individual or group is able to achieve governs how far they are able to put their wishes into practice.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">power elite</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Small networks of individuals who, according to C. Wright Mills, hold concentrated power in modern societies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">prejudice</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The holding of preconceived ideas about an individual or group, ideas that are resistant to change even in the face of new information. Prejudice may be either positive or negative.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">preoperational stage</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development in which the child has advanced sufficiently to master basic modes of logical thought.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">primary deviance</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to Edwin Lemert, the actions that cause others to label one as a deviant.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">primary group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group that is characterized by intense emotional ties, face-to-face interaction, intimacy, and a strong, enduring sense of commitment.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">primary socialization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process by which children learn the cultural norms of the society into which they are born. Primary socialization occurs largely in the family.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">profane</span> <span class="bold">•</span> That which belongs to the mundane, everyday world.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">proletariat</span> <span class="bold">•</span> People who sell their labor for wages, according to Marx.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">psychopath</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A specific personality type; such individuals lack the moral sense and concern for others held by most normal people.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">public issues</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Difficulties or problems that are linked to the institutional and historical possibilities of social structure.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">race</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Differences in human physical characteristics used to categorize large numbers of individuals.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">racialization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process by which understandings of race are used to classify individuals or groups of people. Racial distinctions are more than ways of describing human differences; they are also important factors in the reproduction of patterns of power and inequality.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">racism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The attribution of characteristics of superiority or inferiority to a population sharing certain physically inherited characteristics. Racism is a form of prejudice focusing on physical variations among people. Racist <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A9"></span>attitudes became entrenched during the period of Western colonial expansion, but also rest on mechanisms of prejudice and discrimination found in human societies today.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">radical feminism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Form of feminist theory that believes that gender inequality is the result of male domination in all aspects of social and economic life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">random sampling</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Sampling method in which a sample is chosen so that every member of the population has the same probability of being included.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">rape</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The forcing of non-consensual vaginal, oral, or anal intercourse.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">rape culture</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Social context where attitudes and norms perpetuate the treatment of women as sexual objects and instill in men a sense of sexual entitlement.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">reference group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group that provides a standard for judging one’s attitudes or behaviors.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">refugee</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A person who has fled his or her home due to a political, economic, or natural crisis.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">regionalization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The division of social life into different regional settings or zones.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">relative deprivation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The recognition that one has less than his or her peers.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">relative poverty</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Poverty defined according to the living standards of the majority in any given society.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">religion</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A set of beliefs adhered to by the members of a community, incorporating symbols regarded with a sense of awe or wonder together with ritual practices. Religions do not universally involve a belief in supernatural entities.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">religious economy</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A theoretical framework within the sociology of religion that argues that religions can be fruitfully understood as organizations in competition with one another for followers.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">religious nationalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The linking of strongly held religious convictions with beliefs about a people’s social and political destiny.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">representative sample</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A sample from a larger population that is statistically typical of that population.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">resocialization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process of learning new norms, values, and behaviors when one joins a new group or takes on a new social role, or when life circumstances change dramatically.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">response cries</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Seemingly involuntary exclamations individuals make when, for example, being taken by surprise, dropping something inadvertently, or expressing pleasure.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sacred</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Describing something that inspires awe or reverence among those who believe in a given set of religious ideas.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sample</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A small proportion of a larger population.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sampling</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Studying a proportion of individuals or cases from a larger population as representative of that population as a whole.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sanction</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A mode of reward or punishment that reinforces socially expected forms of behavior.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">scapegoat</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An individual or group blamed for wrongs that were not of their doing.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">science</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The disciplined marshaling of empirical data, combined with theoretical approaches and theories that illuminate or explain those data. Scientific activity combines the creation of new modes of thought with the careful testing of hypotheses and ideas. One major feature that helps distinguish science from other idea systems (such as religion) is the assumption that all scientific ideas are open to criticism and revision.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">scientific racism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The use of scientific research or data to justify or reify beliefs about the superiority or inferiority of particular racial groups. Much of the “data” used to justify such claims is flawed or biased.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">second shift</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The excessive work hours borne by women relative to men; these hours are typically spent on domestic chores following the end of a day of work outside the home.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">secondary deviance</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to Edwin Lemert, following the act of primary deviance, secondary deviation occurs when an individual accepts the label of deviant and acts accordingly.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">secondary group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group characterized by its large size and by impersonal, fleeting relationships.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sect</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A religious movement that breaks away from orthodoxy.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">secular thinking</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Worldly thinking, particularly as seen in the rise of science, technology, and rational thought in general.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">secularization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A process of decline in the influence of religion. Although modern societies have become increasingly secularized, tracing the extent of secularization is a complex matter. Secularization can refer to levels of involvement with religious organizations (such as rates of church attendance), the social and material influence wielded by religious organizations, and the degree to which people hold religious beliefs.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">segregation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The practices of keeping racial and ethnic groups physically separate, thereby maintaining the superior position of the dominant group.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">self-consciousness</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Awareness of one’s distinct social identity as a person separate from others. Human beings are not born with self-consciousness but acquire an awareness of self as a result of early socialization. The learning of language is of vital importance to the processes by which the child learns to become a self-conscious being.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">self-identity</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The ongoing process of self-development and definition of our personal identity through which we formulate a unique sense of ourselves and our relationship to the world around us.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">semiperipheral countries</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Countries that supply sources of labor and raw materials to the core industrial countries and the world economy but are not themselves fully industrialized societies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sensorimotor stage</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development in which the child’s awareness of his or her environment is dominated by perception and touch.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">service society</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A concept related to postindustrial society, it refers to a social order distinguished by the growth of service occupations at the expense of industrial jobs that produce material goods.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sex</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The biological and anatomical differences distinguishing females from males.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sex segregation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The concentration of men and women in different jobs. These differences are believed to contribute to the gender pay gap.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sexual harassment</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The making of unwanted sexual advances by one individual toward another, in which the first person persists even though it is clear that the other party is resistant.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sexual orientation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The direction of one’s sexual or romantic attraction.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">shaming</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A way of punishing criminal and deviant behavior based on rituals of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A10"></span>public disapproval rather than incarceration. The goal of shaming is to maintain the ties of the offender to the community.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">short-range downward mobility</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Social mobility that occurs when an individual moves from one position in the class structure to another of nearly equal status.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sick role</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A term associated with the functionalist Talcott Parsons to describe the patterns of behavior that a sick person adopts in order to minimize the disruptive impact of his or her illness on others.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">signifier</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Any vehicle of meaning and communication.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">slavery</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A form of social stratification in which some people are owned by others as their property.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social aggregate</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A collection of people who happen to be together in a particular place but do not significantly interact or identify with one another.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social capital</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The social knowledge and connections that enable people to accomplish their goals and extend their influence.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social category</span> <span class="bold">•</span> People who share a common characteristic (such as gender or occupation) but do not necessarily interact or identify with one another.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social change</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Alteration in basic structures of a social group or society. Social change is an ever-present phenomenon in social life, but has become especially intense in the modern era. The origins of modern sociology can be traced to attempts to understand the dramatic changes shattering the traditional world and promoting new forms of social order.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social class gradient in health</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The strong inverse association between socioeconomic resources and risk of illness or death.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social conflict theories of aging</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Arguments that emphasize the ways in which the larger social structure helps to shape the opportunities available to the elderly. Unequal opportunities are seen as creating the potential for conflict.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social constraint</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The conditioning influence on our behavior by the groups and societies of which we are members. Social constraint was regarded by Émile Durkheim as one of the distinctive properties of social facts.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social construction of gender</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The learning of gender roles through socialization and interaction with others.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social exclusion</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The outcome of multiple deprivations that prevent individuals or groups from participating fully in the economic, social, and political life of the society in which they live.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social facts</span> <span class="bold">•</span> According to Émile Durkheim, the aspects of social life that shape our actions as individuals. Durkheim believed that social facts could be studied scientifically.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social gerontologists</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Social scientists who study aging and the elderly.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social group</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A collection of people who regularly interact with one another on the basis of shared expectations concerning behavior and who share a sense of common identity.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social interaction</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process by which we act and react to those around us.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social mobility</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Movement of individuals or groups among different social positions.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social position</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The social identity an individual has in a given group or society. Social positions may be general in nature (those associated with gender roles) or may be more specific (occupational positions).</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social reproduction</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process whereby societies have structural continuity over time. Social reproduction is an important pathway through which parents transmit or produce values, norms, and social practices among their children.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social rights</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Rights of social and welfare provision held by all citizens in a national community, including, for example, the right to claim unemployment benefits and sickness payments provided by the state.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social roles</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Socially defined expectations of an individual in a given status, or occupying a particular social position. In every society, individuals play a number of social roles, such as teenager, parent, worker, or political leader.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">Social Security</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A government program that provides economic assistance to persons faced with unemployment, disability, or old age.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social self</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The basis of self-consciousness in human individuals, according to the theory of George Herbert Mead. The social self is the identity conferred upon an individual by the reactions of others. A person achieves self-consciousness by becoming aware of this social identity.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">social stratification</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The existence of structured inequalities among groups in society, in terms of their access to material or symbolic rewards. While all societies involve some forms of stratification, only with the development of state-based systems did wide differences in wealth and power arise. The most distinctive form of stratification in modern societies is class divisions.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">socialization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The social processes through which we develop an awareness of social norms and values and achieve a distinct sense of self. Although socialization processes are particularly significant in infancy and childhood, they continue to some degree throughout life. None of us are immune from the reactions of others around us, which influence and modify our behavior at all phases of our life course.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">socialization of nature</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process by which we control phenomena regarded as “natural,” such as reproduction.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">society</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group of people who live in a particular territory, are subject to a common system of political authority, and are aware of having a distinct identity from other groups. Some societies, like hunting and gathering societies, are small, numbering no more than a few dozen people. Others are large, numbering millions—modern Chinese society, for instance, has a population of more than a billion people.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sociobiology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An approach that attempts to explain the behavior of both animals and human beings in terms of biological principles.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sociological imagination</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The application of imaginative thought to the asking and answering of sociological questions. Someone using the sociological imagination “thinks himself away” from the familiar routines of daily life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sociology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The study of human groups and societies, giving particular emphasis to analysis of the industrialized world. Sociology is one of a group of social sciences, which include anthropology, economics, political science, and human geography. The divisions among the various social sciences are not clear-cut, and all share a certain range of common interests, concepts, and methods.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sociology of the body</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Field that focuses on how our bodies are affected <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A11"></span>by social influences. Health and illness, for instance, are shaped by social and cultural influences.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sovereignty</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The undisputed political rule of a state over a given territorial area.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">standard deviation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A way of calculating the spread of a group of figures.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">standardized testing</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A procedure whereby all students in a state take the same test under the same conditions.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">state</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A political apparatus (government institutions plus civil service officials) ruling over a given territorial order, whose authority is backed by law and the ability to use force. The emergence of the state marked a distinctive transition in human history, because the centralization of political power involved in state formation introduced new dynamics into processes of social change.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">state-centered theories</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Development theories that argue that appropriate government policies do not interfere with economic development, but rather can play a key role in bringing it about.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">status</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The social honor or prestige that a particular group is accorded by other members of a society. Status groups normally display distinct styles of life—patterns of behavior that the members of a group follow. Status privilege may be positive or negative. Pariah status groups are regarded with disdain or treated as outcasts by the majority of the population.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">stepfamily</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A family in which at least one partner has children from a previous marriage.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">stereotype</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A fixed and inflexible category.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">stigma</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Any physical or social characteristic that is labeled by society as undesirable.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">strike</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A temporary stoppage of work by a group of employees in order to express a grievance or enforce a demand.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">structural strain</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Tensions that produce conflicting interests within societies.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">structuration</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The two-way process by which we shape our social world through our individual actions and by which we are reshaped by society.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">structure</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The recurrent patterned arrangements and hierarchies that influence or limit the choices and opportunities available to us.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">subculture</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Values and norms distinct from those of the majority, held by a group within a wider society.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">suburbanization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The development of suburbia, areas of housing outside inner cities.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">suffrage</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A legal right to vote guaranteed by the Fifteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution; guaranteed to women by the Nineteenth Amendment.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">suffragettes</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Members of early women’s movements who pressed for equal voting rights for women and men.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">surplus value</span> <span class="bold">•</span> In Marxist theory, the value of a worker’s labor power left over when an employer has repaid the cost of hiring the worker.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">survey</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A method of sociological research in which questionnaires are administered to the population being studied.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">sustainable development</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The notion that economic growth should proceed only insofar as natural resources are recycled rather than depleted; biodiversity is maintained; and clean air, water, and land are protected.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">symbol</span> <span class="bold">•</span> One item used to stand for or represent another—as in the case of a flag, which symbolizes a nation.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">symbolic interactionism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A theoretical approach in sociology developed by George Herbert Mead that emphasizes the role of symbols and language as core elements of all human interaction.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">target hardening</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Practical measures used to limit a criminal’s ability to commit crime, such as community policing and use of house alarms.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">technology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The application of knowledge of the material world to production; the creation of material instruments (such as machines) used in human interaction with nature.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">terrorism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Use of attacks on civilians designed to persuade a government to alter its policies, or to damage its standing in the world.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">theism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A belief in one or more supernatural deities.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">theoretical questions</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Questions posed by sociologists when seeking to explain a particular range of observed events. The asking of theoretical questions is crucial to allowing us to generalize about the nature of social life.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">theory of racial formation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process by which social, economic, and political forces determine the content and importance of racial categories.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">time-space</span> <span class="bold">•</span> When and where events occur.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">tracking</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Dividing students into groups according to ability.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">transactional leader</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A leader who is concerned with accomplishing the group’s tasks, getting group members to do their jobs, and making certain that the group achieves its goals.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">transformational leader</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A leader who is able to instill in the members of a group a sense of mission or higher purpose, thereby changing the nature of the group itself.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">transnational corporations</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Business corporations located in two or more countries.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">triad</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A group consisting of three persons.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">triangulation</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The use of multiple research methods as a way of producing more reliable empirical data than are available from any single method.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">underclass</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A class of individuals situated at the bottom of the class system, often composed of people from ethnic minority backgrounds.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">unfocused interaction</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Interaction occurring among people present in a particular setting but not engaged in direct face-to-face communication.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">Uniform Crime Reports (UCR)</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Documents that contain official data on crime that are reported to law enforcement agencies that then provide the data to the FBI.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">union</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An organization that advances and protects the interests of workers with respect to working conditions, wages, and benefits.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">universal health coverage</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Public health care programs motivated by the goal of providing affordable health services to all members of a population.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">upper class</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A social class broadly composed of the more affluent members of society, especially those who have inherited wealth, own businesses, or hold large numbers of stocks (shares).</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">urban ecology</span> <span class="bold">•</span> An approach to the study of urban life based on an analogy with the adjustment of plants and organisms to the physical environment. According to ecological theorists, the various neighborhoods and zones within cities are formed as a result of natural processes of adjustment on the part of populations as they compete for resources.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">urban renewal</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The process of renovating deteriorating neighborhoods by <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_A12"></span>encouraging the renewal of old buildings and the construction of new ones.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">urbanism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A term used by Louis Wirth to denote distinctive characteristics of urban social life, such as its impersonal or alienating nature.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">urbanization</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The development of towns and cities.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">values</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Ideas held by individuals or groups about what is desirable, proper, good, and bad. What individuals value is strongly influenced by the specific culture in which they happen to live.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">wealth</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Money and material possessions held by an individual or group.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">welfare capitalism</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Practice in which large corporations protect their employees from the vicissitudes of the market.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">welfare state</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A political system that provides a wide range of welfare benefits for its citizens.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">white-collar crime</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Criminal activities carried out by those in white-collar, or professional, jobs.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">work</span> <span class="bold">•</span> The activity by which people produce from the natural world and so ensure their survival. Work should not be thought of exclusively as paid employment. In traditional cultures, there was only a rudimentary monetary system, and few people worked for money. In modern societies, there remain types of work that do not involve direct payment (for example, housework).</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">working class</span> <span class="bold">•</span> A social class broadly composed of people working in blue-collar, or manual, occupations.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">working poor</span> <span class="bold">•</span> People who work, but whose earnings are not enough to lift them above the poverty line.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">world-systems theory</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Pioneered by Immanuel Wallerstein, this theory emphasizes the interconnections among countries based on the expansion of a capitalist world economy. This economy is made up of core countries, semiperipheral countries, and peripheral countries.</p>
<p class="BM_GLD">&#160;</p>
<p class="BM_GLD"><span class="bold">young old</span> <span class="bold">•</span> Sociological term for persons between the ages of sixty-five and seventy-four.</p>
</div>
</div>
<script>if (window.parent != null) if (window.parent.Ebook != null) if (window.parent.Ebook.section_loaded != null) window.parent.Ebook.section_loaded(window);</script></body>
</html>