<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<!-- Needed for proper mobile responsiveness. -->
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
 <!-- Add ExplorerCanvas for backwards compatibility -->
 <!--[if lt IE 9]>
 <script src="js/dev/excanvas/excanvas.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <![endif]-->
 <!-- Add jQuery library -->
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/dev/jquery-ui/jquery-ui.min.css" />
 <script src="js/dev/jquery/jquery-1.11.1.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <script src="js/dev/jquery/jquery-ui-1.11.0.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <!-- Add jQuery Mobile library -->
 
 
 <!-- Add Bootstrap CSS framework -->
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/dev/bootstrap/bootstrap.css" />
 <!-- Add Tipped - for tooltip functionality -->
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/dev/tipped/jquery.tipped.css" />
 <script src="js/dev/tipped/jquery.spinners.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <script src="js/dev/tipped/jquery.tipped.js" type="text/javascript"></script>

 <!-- Add fancyBox - for image/text overlay functionality -->
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/dev/fancybox/jquery.fancybox.css" />
 <script src="js/dev/fancybox/jquery.fancybox.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <script src="js/dev/fancybox/jquery.fancybox.pack.js" type="text/javascript"></script>

 <!-- Add PanZoom - for zoom overlay and panning functionality -->
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/dev/panzoom/jquery.panzoom.css" />
 <script src="js/dev/panzoom/jquery.panzoom.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <!-- Add TweenMax and ScrollTo - for page-scrolling functionality -->
 <script src="js/dev/tweenmax/jquery.TweenMax.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <script src="js/dev/scrollto/jquery.ScrollToPlugin.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <!-- Add Visible - to check if elements are in viewport window -->
 <script src="js/dev/visible/jquery.visible.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <!-- Add Font Awesome - icon font pack;   For usage, go to: http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/examples/ -->
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/dev/fontawesome/font-awesome.min.css" />

 <!-- Add custom functions -->
 
 <!-- Initialize all scripts -->
 <script src="js/custom/master.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <script src="js/custom/naIE.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <script src="js/custom/naM2.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <script src="js/custom/naOL.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 
 <script src="js/custom/naRH.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <script src="js/custom/naT1.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
 <!-- Apply custom styles -->
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/custom/master.css" />
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/custom/naIE.css" />
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/custom/naM2.css" />
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/custom/naOL.css" />
 
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/custom/naRH.css" />
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/custom/naT1.css" />
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/custom/naTL.css" />
 <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/custom/naTv.css" />
 <link type="text/css" href="css/dev/swipe/responsive-slider.css" rel="stylesheet" />
<title>Norton Ebook Development Kit - Feature Swatch</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css" />
<link type="text/css" href="../../../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" /></head>
<body>
<div data-role="page">
<div role="main" class="container ui-content">
<div class="row">
<div class="naToggle col-xs-12 col-sm-10 col-sm-offset-1 col-md-8 col-md-offset-2"> <!-- If a section contains naM2 marginal page reference elements, decrease col-sm and col-md by 1 to account for extra space needed on the right. -->
<h2 class="chaptitle-cr"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-1" title="A-1"></span><span class="underline">GLOSSARY</span></h2>
<h3 class="bmhead">A</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Absolute poverty</span></b> the point at which a household&#x2019;s income falls below the necessary level to purchase food to physically sustain its members.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Achieved status</span></b> a status into which one enters; voluntary status.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Affirmative action</span></b> a set of policies that grant preferential treatment to a number of particular subgroups within the population&#x2014;typically, women and historically disadvantaged racial minorities.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Agricultural revolution</span></b> the period around 1700 marked by the introduction of new farming technologies that increased food output in farm production.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Alienation</span></b> a condition in which people are dominated by forces of their own creation that then confront them as alien powers; according to Marx, the basic state of being in a capitalist society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Alterative social movements</span></b> social movements that seek the most limited societal change and often target a narrow group of people.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Altruism</span></b> an action that benefits a group but does not directly benefit the individual performing the action.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Altruistic suicide</span></b> suicide that occurs when one experiences too much social integration.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Animism</span></b> the belief that spirits are part of the natural world, as in totemism.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Anomic suicide</span></b> suicide that occurs as a result of insufficient social regulation.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Anomie</span></b> a sense of aimlessness or despair that arises when we can no longer reasonably expect life to be predictable; too little social regulation; normlessness.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Ascribed status</span></b> a status into which one is born; involuntary status.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Association</span></b> <i>see</i> correlation.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Authority</span></b> the justifiable right to exercise power.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">B</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Biological determinism</span></b> a line of thought that explains social behavior in terms of who you are in the natural world.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Boundary work</span></b> work done to maintain the border between legitimate and nonlegitimate science within a specific scientific discipline or between legitimate disciplines.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Bourgeois society</span></b> a society of commerce (modern capitalist society, for example) in which the maximization of profit is the primary business incentive.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Bourgeoisie</span></b> the capitalist class.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Broken windows theory of deviance</span></b> theory explaining how social context and social cues impact whether individuals act deviantly; specifically, whether local, informal social norms allow deviant acts.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Bureaucracy</span></b> a legal-rational organization or mode of administration that governs with reference to formal rules and roles and emphasizes meritocracy.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">C</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Capitalism</span></b> an economic system in which property and goods are primarily privately owned; investments are determined by private decisions; and prices, production, and the distribution of goods are determined primarily by competition in an unfettered marketplace.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Case study</span></b> an intensive investigation of one particular unit of analysis in order to describe it or uncover its mechanisms.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Caste system</span></b> a religion-based system of stratification characterized by no social mobility.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-2" title="A-2"></span><b><span class="color">Causality</span></b> the notion that a change in one factor results in a corresponding change in another.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Charismatic authority</span></b> authority that rests on the personal appeal of an individual leader.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Churches</span></b> religious bodies that coexist in a relatively low state of tension with their social surroundings. They have mainstream, &#x201C;safe&#x201D; beliefs and practices relative to those of the general population.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Citizenship rights</span></b> the rights guaranteed to each law-abiding citizen in a nation-state.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Civil rights</span></b> the rights guaranteeing a citizen&#x2019;s personal freedom from interference, including freedom of speech and the right to travel freely.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Class system</span></b> an economically based hierarchical system characterized by cohesive, oppositional groups and somewhat loose social mobility.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Classical model</span></b> model of social movements based on a concept of structural weakness in society that results in the psychological disruption of individuals.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Coalescence</span></b> the second stage of a social movement, in which resources are mobilized (that is, concrete action is taken) around the problems outlined in the first stage.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Coercion</span></b> the use of force to get others to do what you want.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Cohabitation</span></b> living together in an intimate relationship without formal legal or religious sanctioning.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Collective action</span></b> action that takes place in groups and diverges from the social norms of the situation.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Collective action problem</span></b> the difficulty in organizing large groups because of the tendency of some individuals to freeload or slack off.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Collective resistance</span></b> an organized effort to change a power hierarchy on the part of a less-powerful group in a society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Communism</span></b> a political ideology of a classless society in which the means of production are shared through state ownership and in which rewards are tied not to productivity but to need.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Comparative research</span></b> a methodology by which two or more entities (such as countries), which are similar in many dimensions but differ on one in question, are compared to learn about the dimension that differs between them.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Conflict theory</span></b> the idea that conflict between competing interests is the basic, animating force of social change and society in general.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Conformist</span></b> individual who accepts both the goals and strategies to achieve them that are considered socially acceptable.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Congregation</span></b> a group of people who gather together, especially for worship.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Consumerism</span></b> the steady acquisition of material possessions, often with the belief that happiness and fulfillment can thus be achieved.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Contagion theory</span></b> theory of collective action claiming that collective action arises because of people&#x2019;s tendency to conform to the behavior of others with whom they are in close contact.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Content analysis</span></b> a systematic analysis of the content rather than the structure of a communication, such as a written work, speech, or film.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Contradictory class locations</span></b> the idea that people can occupy locations in the class structure that fall between the two &#x201C;pure&#x201D; classes.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Convergence theory</span></b> theory of collective action stating that collective action happens when people with similar ideas and tendencies gather in the same place.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Corporate crime</span></b> a particular type of white-collar crime committed by the officers (CEOs and other executives) of a corporation.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Corporation</span></b> a legal entity unto itself that has a legal personhood distinct from that of its members&#x2014;namely, its owners and shareholders.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Correlation or association</span></b> simultaneous variation in two variables.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Credentialism</span></b> an overemphasis on credentials (e.g., college degrees) for signaling social status or qualifications for a job.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-3" title="A-3"></span><b><span class="color">Crime</span></b> the violation of laws enacted by society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Cult</span></b> religious movement that makes some new claim about the supernatural and therefore does not easily fit within the sect&#x2013;church cycle.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Cult of domesticity</span></b> the notion that true womanhood centers on domestic responsibility and child rearing.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Cultural capital</span></b> the symbolic and interactional resources that people use to their advantage in various situations.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Cultural relativism</span></b> taking into account the differences across cultures without passing judgment or assigning value.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Cultural scripts</span></b> modes of behavior and understanding that are not universal or natural.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Culture</span></b> a set of beliefs, traditions, and practices; the sum of the social categories and concepts we embrace in addition to beliefs, behaviors (except instinctual ones), and practices; everything but the natural environment around us.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Culture jamming</span></b> the act of turning media against themselves.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Culture of poverty</span></b> the argument that poor people adopt certain practices that differ from those of middle-class, &#x201C;mainstream&#x201D; society in order to adapt and survive in difficult economic circumstances.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">D</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Deductive approach</span></b> a research approach that starts with a theory, forms a hypothesis, makes empirical observations, and then analyzes the data to confirm, reject, or modify the original theory.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Democracy</span></b> a system of government wherein power theoretically lies with the people; citizens are allowed to vote in elections, speak freely, and participate as legal equals in social life.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Denomination</span></b> a group of congregations that share the same faith and are governed under one administrative umbrella.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Dependent variable</span></b> the outcome that the researcher is trying to explain.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Deterrence theory</span></b> philosophy of criminal justice arising from the notion that crime results from a rational calculation of its costs and benefits.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Dialectic</span></b> a two-directional relationship following a pattern in which an original statement or thesis is countered with an antithesis, leading to a conclusion that unites the strengths of the original position and the counterarguments.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Dictatorship</span></b> a form of government that restricts the right to political participation to a small group or even to a single individual.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Discrimination</span></b> harmful or negative acts (not mere thoughts) against people deemed inferior on the basis of their racial category, without regard to their individual merit.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color"><i>Divide et impera</i></span></b> the role of a member of a triad who intentionally drives a wedge between the other two actors in the group.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Domination</span></b> the probability that a command with specific content will be obeyed by a given group of people.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Double consciousness</span></b> a concept conceived by W. E. B. Du Bois to describe the two behavioral scripts, one for moving through the world and the other incorporating the external opinions of prejudiced onlookers, which are constantly maintained by African Americans.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Dramaturgical theory</span></b> the view (advanced by Erving Goffman) of social life as essentially a theatrical performance, in which we are all actors on metaphorical stages, with roles, scripts, costumes, and sets.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Dyad</span></b> a group of two.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">E</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Education</span></b> the process through which academic, social, and cultural ideas and tools, both general and specific, are developed.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Egoistic suicide</span></b> suicide that occurs when one is not well integrated into a social group.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Elite&#x2013;mass dichotomy system</span></b> a system of stratification that has a governing elite, a few leaders who broadly hold power in society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-4" title="A-4"></span><b><span class="color">Embeddedness</span></b> the degree to which ties are reinforced through indirect paths within a social network.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Emergence</span></b> the first stage of a social movement, occurring when the social problem being addressed is first identified.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Emergent norm theory</span></b> theory of collective action emphasizing the influence of keynoters in promoting new behavioral norms.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Endogamy</span></b> marriage to someone within one&#x2019;s social group.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Equality of condition</span></b> the idea that everyone should have an equal starting point.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Equality of opportunity</span></b> the idea that everyone has an equal chance to achieve wealth, social prestige, and power because the rules of the game, so to speak, are the same for everyone.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Equality of outcome</span></b> the idea that each player must end up with the same amount regardless of the fairness of the &#x201C;game.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Essentialism</span></b> a line of thought that explains social phenomena in terms of natural ones.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Estate system</span></b> a politically based system of stratification characterized by limited social mobility.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Ethicalism</span></b> the adherence to certain principles to lead a moral life, as in Buddhism and Taoism.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Ethnicity</span></b> one&#x2019;s ethnic quality or affiliation. It is voluntary, self-defined, nonhierarchal, fluid and multiple, and based on cultural differences, not physical ones per se.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Ethnocentrism</span></b> the belief that one&#x2019;s own culture or group is superior to others, and the tendency to view all other cultures from the perspective of one&#x2019;s own.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Ethnomethodology</span></b> literally &#x201C;the methods of the people&#x201D;; this approach to studying human interaction focuses on the ways in which we make sense of our world, convey this understanding to others, and produce a shared social order.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Eugenics</span></b> literally meaning &#x201C;well born;&#x201D; a pseudoscience that postulates that controlling the fertility of populations could influence inheritable traits passed on from generation to generation.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Evangelicals</span></b> members of any Protestant denomination distinguished by four main beliefs: The Bible is without error, salvation comes only through belief in Jesus Christ, personal conversion is the only path to salvation (the &#x201C;born again&#x201D; experience), and others must also be converted. They proselytize by engaging with wider society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Exchange mobility</span></b> mobility in which, if we hold fixed the changing distribution of jobs, individuals trade jobs not one-to-one but in a way that ultimately balances out.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Exogamy</span></b> marriage to someone outside one&#x2019;s social group.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Experimental methods</span></b> methods that seek to alter the social landscape in a very specific way for a given sample of individuals and then track what results that change yields; often involve comparisons to a control group that did not experience such an intervention.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Extended family</span></b> kin networks that extend outside or beyond the nuclear family.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">F</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Face</span></b> the esteem in which an individual is held by others.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Family wage</span></b> a wage paid to male workers sufficient to support a dependent wife and children.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Fatalistic suicide</span></b> suicide that occurs as a result of too much social regulation.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Feminism</span></b> a consciousness-raising movement to get people to understand that gender is an organizing principle of life. The underlying belief is that women and men should be accorded equal opportunities and respect.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Feminist methodology</span></b> a set of systems or methods that treat women&#x2019;s experiences as legitimate empirical and theoretical resources, that promote social sciences <i>for</i> women (think public sociology, but for a specific half of the public), and that take into account the researcher as much as the overt subject matter.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Feudalism</span></b> a precapitalist economic system characterized by the presence of lords, vassals, serfs, and fiefs.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-5" title="A-5"></span><b><span class="color">Formal social sanctions</span></b> mechanisms of social control by which rules or laws prohibit deviant criminal behavior.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Free rider problem</span></b> the notion that when more than one person is responsible for getting something done, the incentive is for each individual to shirk responsibility and hope others will pull the extra weight.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Functionalism</span></b> the theory that various social institutions and processes in society exist to serve some important (or necessary) function to keep society running.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Fundamentalists</span></b> religious adherents who follow a scripture (such as the Bible or Qur&#x2019;an) using a literal interpretation of its meaning.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">G</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Game theory</span></b> the study of strategic decisions made under conditions of uncertainty and interdependence.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Gender</span></b> a social position; the set of social arrangements that are built around normative sex categories.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Gender roles</span></b> sets of behavioral norms assumed to accompany one&#x2019;s status as male or female.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Generalizability</span></b> the extent to which we can claim our findings inform us about a group larger than the one we studied.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Generalized other</span></b> an internalized sense of the total expectations of others in a variety of settings&#x2014; regardless of whether we&#x2019;ve encountered those people or places before.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Genocide</span></b> the mass killing of a group of people based on racial, ethnic, or religious traits.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Glass ceiling</span></b> an invisible limit on women&#x2019;s climb up the occupational ladder.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Glass escalator</span></b> the accelerated promotion of men to the top of a work organization, especially in feminized jobs.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Global warming</span></b> rising atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, resulting in higher global average temperatures.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Grassroots organization</span></b> a type of social movement organization that relies on high levels of community-based participation to promote social change. It lacks a hierarchical structure and works through existing political structures.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">H</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Hegemonic masculinity</span></b> the condition in which men are dominant and privileged, and this dominance and privilege is invisible.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Hegemony</span></b> a condition by which a dominant group uses its power to elicit the voluntary &#x201C;consent&#x201D; of the masses.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Hidden curriculum</span></b> the nonacademic and less overt socialization functions of schooling.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Historical methods</span></b> research that collects data from written reports, newspaper articles, journals, transcripts, television programs, diaries, artwork, and other artifacts that date back to the period under study.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Homosexual</span></b> the social identity of a person who has sexual attraction to and/or relations with other persons of the same sex.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Hypothesis</span></b> a proposed relationship between two variables.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">I</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><span class="color"><b>I</b></span> one&#x2019;s sense of agency, action, or power.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Ideology</span></b> a system of concepts and relationships, an understanding of cause and effect.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Income</span></b> money received by a person for work, from transfers (gifts, inheritances, or government assistance), or from returns on investments.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Independent variable</span></b> a measured factor that the researcher believes has a causal impact on the dependent variable.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Inductive approach</span></b> a research approach that starts with empirical observations and then works to form a theory.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Informal social sanctions</span></b> the usually unexpressed but widely known rules of group membership; the unspoken rules of social life.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">In-group</span></b> another term for the powerful group, most often the majority.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-6" title="A-6"></span><b><span class="color">Innovator</span></b> social deviant who accepts socially acceptable goals but rejects socially acceptable means to achieve them.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Institutional racism</span></b> institutions and social dynamics that may seem race-neutral but actually disadvantage minority groups.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Institutionalization</span></b> <i>see</i> routinization.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Interest group</span></b> an organization that seeks to gain power in government and influence policy without campaigning for direct election or appointment to office.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">International state system</span></b> a system in which each state is recognized as territorially sovereign by fellow states.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Isomorphism</span></b> a constraining process that forces one unit in a population to resemble other units that face the same set of environmental conditions.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">K</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Kinship networks</span></b> strings of relationships between people related by blood and co-residence (that is, marriage).</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">L</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Labeling theory</span></b> the belief that individuals subconsciously notice how others see or label them, and their reactions to those labels over time form the basis of their self-identity.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Large group</span></b> a group characterized by the presence of a formal structure that mediates interaction and, consequently, status differentiation.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Legal-rational authority</span></b> authority based on legal, impersonal rules; the rules rule.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">M</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Macrosociology</span></b> a branch of sociology generally concerned with social dynamics at a higher level of analysis&#x2014;that is, across the breadth of a society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Master status</span></b> one status within a set that stands out or overrides all others.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Material culture</span></b> everything that is a part of our constructed, physical environment, including technology.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Matthew effect</span></b> a term used by sociologists to describe the notion that certain scientific results get more notoriety and influence based on the existing prestige of the researchers involved.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Me</span></b> the self as perceived as an object by the &#x201C;I&#x201D;; the self as one imagines others perceive one.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Mechanical or segmental solidarity</span></b> social cohesion based on sameness.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Media</span></b> any formats, platforms, or vehicles that carry, present, or communicate information.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Mediator</span></b> the member of a triad who attempts to resolve conflict between the two other actors in the group.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Medicalization</span></b> the process by which problems or issues not traditionally seen as medical come to be framed as such.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Megachurch</span></b> typically, a conservative Protestant church that attracts at least 2,000 worshippers per week.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Meritocracy</span></b> a society where status and mobility are based on individual attributes, ability, and achievement; a society that assigns social status, power, and economic rewards on achievement, not ascribed, personal attributes or favoritism.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Microsociology</span></b> a branch of sociology that seeks to understand local interactional contexts; its methods of choice are ethnographic, generally including participant observation and in-depth interviews.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Middle class</span></b> a term commonly used to describe those individuals with nonmanual jobs that pay significantly more than the poverty line&#x2014;though this is a highly debated and expansive category, particularly in the United States, where broad swathes of the population consider themselves middle class.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Midrange theory</span></b> a theory that attempts to predict how certain social institutions tend to function.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Milgram experiment</span></b> An experiment devised in 1961 by Stanley Milgram, a psychologist at Yale University, to see how far ordinary people would go to obey a scientific authority figure.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Miscegenation</span></b> the technical term for multiracial marriage; literally meaning &#x201C;a mixing of kinds&#x201D;; because the term is politically and historically charged, sociologists generally prefer <i>exogamy</i> or <i>outmarriage.</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-7" title="A-7"></span><b><span class="color">Modernity</span></b> social relations characterized by rationality, bureaucratization, and objectivity&#x2014;as well as individuality created by nonconcentric, but overlapping, group affiliations.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Monogamy</span></b> the practice of having only one sexual partner or spouse at a time.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Monopoly</span></b> when one seller of a good or service dominates the market to the exclusion of others, potentially leading to zero competition.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Morbidity</span></b> illness in a general sense.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Mortality</span></b> death.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">N</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Narrative</span></b> the sum of stories contained in a set of ties.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Nativism</span></b> the movement to protect and preserve indigenous land or culture from the allegedly dangerous and polluting effects of new immigrants.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Nonmaterial culture</span></b> values, beliefs, behaviors, and social norms.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Normal science</span></b> science conducted within an existing paradigm, as defined by Thomas Kuhn.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Normative view of science</span></b> the notion that science should be unaffected by the personal beliefs or values of scientists but rather follow objective rules of evidence.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Norms</span></b> how values tell us to behave.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Nuclear family</span></b> familial form consisting of a father, a mother, and their children.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">O</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Offshoring</span></b> a business decision to move all or part of a company&#x2019;s operations abroad to minimize costs.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Oligopoly</span></b> the economic condition that exists when a handful of firms effectively control a particular market.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">One-drop rule</span></b> the belief that &#x201C;one drop&#x201D; of black blood makes a person black, a concept that evolved from U. S. laws forbidding miscegenation.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Ontological equality</span></b> the philosophical and religious notion that all people are created equal at birth.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Operationalization</span></b> the process of assigning a precise method for measuring a term being examined for use in a particular study.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Organic solidarity</span></b> social cohesion based on difference and interdependence of the parts.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Organization</span></b> any social network that is defined by a common purpose and has a boundary between its membership and the rest of the social world.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Organizational culture</span></b> the shared beliefs and behaviors within a social group; often used interchangeably with <i>corporate culture.</i></p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Organizational structure</span></b> the ways in which power and authority are distributed within an organization.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Other</span></b> someone or something outside of oneself.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Out-group</span></b> another term for the stigmatized or less powerful group, the minority.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">P</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Panopticon</span></b> a circular building composed of an inner ring and an outer ring designed to serve as a prison in which the guards, housed in the inner ring, can observe the prisoners without the detainees knowing whether they are being watched.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Paradigm</span></b> the framework within which scientists operate.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Paradigm shift or scientific revolution</span></b> when enough scientific anomalies accrue to challenge the existing paradigm, showing that it is incomplete or inadequate to explain all observed phenomena.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Paradox of authority</span></b> although the state&#x2019;s authority derives from the implicit threat of physical force; resorting to physical coercion strips the state of all legitimate authority.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Parenting stress hypothesis</span></b> low income, unstable employment, a lack of cultural resources, and a feeling of inferiority from social class comparisons exacerbate household stress levels; this stress, in turn, leads to detrimental parenting practices such as yelling, shouting, and hitting, which are not conducive to healthy child development.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-8" title="A-8"></span><b><span class="color">Participant observation</span></b> a qualitative research method that seeks to uncover the meanings people give their social actions by observing their behavior in practice.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Party</span></b> a group that is similar to a small group but is multifocal.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Patriarchy</span></b> a nearly universal system involving the subordination of femininity to masculinity.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Perverse incentives</span></b> reward structures that lead to suboptimal outcomes by stimulating counterproductive behavior; for example, welfare&#x2014;to the extent that it discourages work efforts&#x2014;is argued to have perverse incentives.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Pluralism</span></b> the presence and engaged coexistence of numerous distinct groups in one society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Political participation</span></b> any activity that has the intent or effect of influencing government action.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Political party</span></b> an organization that seeks to gain power in a government, generally by backing candidates for office who subscribe (to the extent possible) to the organization&#x2019;s political ideals.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Political process model</span></b> model of social movements that focuses on the structure of political opportunities. When these are favorable to a particular challenger, the chances are better for the success of a social movement led by this challenger.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Political rights</span></b> the rights guaranteeing a citizen&#x2019;s ability to participate in politics, including the right to vote and the right to hold an elected office.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Politics</span></b> power relations among people or other social actors.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Polyandry</span></b> the practice of having multiple husbands simultaneously.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Polygamy</span></b> the practice of having more than one sexual partner or spouse at a time.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Polygyny</span></b> the practice of having multiple wives simultaneously.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Population</span></b> an entire group of individual persons, objects, or items from which samples may be drawn.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Positivist sociology</span></b> a strain within sociology that believes the social world can be described and predicted by certain describable relationships (akin to a social physics).</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Postmodernism</span></b> a condition characterized by a questioning of the notion of progress and history, the replacement of narrative within pastiche, and multiple, perhaps even conflicting, identities resulting from disjointed affiliations.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Postmodernity</span></b> social relations characterized by a questioning of the notion of progress and history, the replacement of narrative with pastiche, and multiple, perhaps even conflicting, identities resulting from disjointed affiliations.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Power</span></b> the ability to carry out one&#x2019;s own will despite resistance.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Prejudice</span></b> thoughts and feelings about an ethnic or racial group.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Premodernity</span></b> social relations characterized by concentric circles of social affiliation, a low degree of division of labor, relatively undeveloped technology, and traditional social norms.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Primary deviance</span></b> the first act of rule-breaking that may incur a label of &#x201C;deviant&#x201D; and thus influence how people think about and act toward you.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Primary groups</span></b> social groups, such as family or friends, composed of enduring, intimate face-to-face relationships that strongly influence the attitudes and ideals of those involved.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Primordialism</span></b> Clifford Geertz&#x2019;s term to explain the strength of ethnic ties because they are fixed in deeply felt or primordial ties to one&#x2019;s homeland culture.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Profane</span></b> the things of mundane, everyday life.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Proletariat</span></b> the working class.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-9" title="A-9"></span>Q</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Qualitative methods</span></b> methods that attempt to collect information about the social world that cannot be readily converted to numeric form.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Quantitative methods</span></b> methods that seek to obtain information about the social world that is already in or can be converted to numeric form.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">R</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Race</span></b> a group of people who share a set of characteristics&#x2014;typically, but not always, physical ones&#x2014; and are said to share a common bloodline.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Racialization</span></b> the formation of a new racial identity by drawing ideological boundaries of difference around a formerly unnoticed group of people.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Racism</span></b> the belief that members of separate races possess different and unequal traits.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Rationalization</span></b> an ever-expanding process of ordering or organizing.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Rebel</span></b> individual who rejects both traditional goals and traditional means and wants to alter or destroy the social institutions from which he or she is alienated.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Recidivism</span></b> when an individual who has been involved with the criminal justice system reverts to criminal behavior.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Redemptive social movements</span></b> social movements that target specific groups but advocate for more radical social change in behavior.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Reference group</span></b> a group that helps us understand or make sense of our position in society relative to other groups.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Reflection theory</span></b> the idea that culture is a projection of social structures and relationships into the public sphere, a screen onto which the film of the underlying reality or social structures of a society is projected.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Reflexive spirituality</span></b> a contemporary religious movement that encourages followers to look to religion for meaning, wisdom, and profound thought and feeling rather than for absolute truths on how the world works.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Reflexivity</span></b> analyzing and critically considering our own role in, and effect on, our research.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Reformative social movements</span></b> social movements that advocate for limited social change across an entire society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Relative poverty</span></b> a measurement of poverty based on a percentage of the median income in a given location.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Reliability</span></b> the likelihood of obtaining consistent results using the same measure.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Religion</span></b> a system of beliefs, traditions, and practices around sacred things; a set of shared &#x201C;stories&#x201D; that guide belief and action.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Religious experience</span></b> an individual&#x2019;s spiritual feelings, acts, and experiences.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Research methods</span></b> approaches that social scientists use for investigating the answers to questions.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Resocialization</span></b> the process by which one&#x2019;s sense of social values, beliefs, and norms are reengineered, often deliberately, through an intense social process that may take place in a total institution.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Resource dilution model</span></b> hypothesis stating that parental resources are finite and that each additional child gets a smaller amount of them.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Resource-mobilization theory</span></b> model of social movements that emphasizes political context and goals but also states that social movements are unlikely to emerge without the necessary resources.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Retreatist</span></b> one who rejects both socially acceptable means and goals by completely retreating from, or not participating in, society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Reverse causality</span></b> a situation in which the researcher believes that A results in a change in B, but B, in fact, is causing A.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Revolutionary social movements</span></b> social movements that advocate the radical reorganization of society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Risk society</span></b> a society that both produces and is concerned with mitigating risks, especially manufactured risks (ones that result from human activity).</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-10" title="A-10"></span><b><span class="color">Ritualist</span></b> individual who rejects socially defined goals but not the means.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Role</span></b> the duties and behaviors expected of someone who holds a particular status.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Role conflict</span></b> the tension caused by competing demands between two or more roles pertaining to different statuses.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Role strain</span></b> the incompatibility among roles corresponding to a single status.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Routinization</span> or <span class="color">institutionalization</span></b> the final stage of a social movement, in which it is institutionalized and a formal structure develops to promote the cause; the clear, rule-governed procedures used repeatedly for decision making.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">S</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sacred</span></b> holy things meant put to special use for worship and kept separate from the profane; the sacred realm is unknowable and mystical, so it inspires us with feelings of awe and wonder.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sacred canopy</span></b> Peter Berger&#x2019;s term to describe the entire set of religious norms, symbols, and beliefs that express the most important thing in life&#x2014;namely, the feeling that life is worth living and that reality is meaningful and ordered, not just random chaos.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sample</span></b> the subset of the population from which you are actually collecting data.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Scientific racism</span></b> nineteenth-century theories of race that characterize a period of feverish investigation into the origins, explanations, and classifications of race.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Scientific revolution</span></b> <i>see</i> paradigm shift.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Second shift</span></b> women&#x2019;s responsibility for housework and child care&#x2014;everything from cooking dinner, to doing laundry, bathing children, reading bedtime stories, and sewing Halloween costumes.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Secondary deviance</span></b> subsequent acts of rule-breaking that occur after primary deviance and as a result of your new deviant label and people&#x2019;s expectations of you.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Secondary groups</span></b> groups marked by impersonal, instrumental relationships (those existing as a means to an end).</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sects</span> or <span class="color">sectarian groups</span></b> high-tension organizations that don&#x2019;t fit well within the existing social environment. They are usually most attractive to society&#x2019;s least privileged&#x2014;outcasts, minorities, or the poor&#x2014;because they downplay worldly pleasure by stressing otherworldly promises.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Secularism</span></b> a general movement away from religiosity and spiritual belief toward a rational, scientific orientation, a trend adopted by industrialized nations in the form of separation of church and state.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Segmental solidarity</span></b> <i>see</i> mechanical solidarity.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Segregation</span></b> the legal or social practice of separating people on the basis of their race or ethnicity.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Self</span></b> the individual identity of a person as perceived by that same person.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Service sector</span></b> the section of the economy that involves providing intangible services.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sex</span></b> the biological differences that distinguish males from females.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sex role theory</span></b> Talcott Parsons&#x2019;s theory that men and women perform their sex roles as breadwinners and wives/mothers, respectively, because the nuclear family is the ideal arrangement in modern societies, fulfilling the function of reproducing workers.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sexism</span></b> occurs when a person&#x2019;s sex or gender is the basis for judgment, discrimination, and hatred against him or her.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sexual harassment</span></b> an illegal form of discrimination, involving everything from inappropriate jokes on the job to outright sexual assault to sexual &#x201C;barter&#x201D;&#x2014;all intended to make women feel uncomfortable and unwelcome, particularly on the job.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sexuality</span></b> desire, sexual preference, and sexual identity and behavior.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sick role</span></b> concept describing the social rights and obligations of a sick individual.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Small group</span></b> a group characterized by face-to-face interaction, a unifocal perspective, lack of formal arrangements or roles, and a certain level of equality.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-11" title="A-11"></span><b><span class="color">Social capital</span></b> the information, knowledge of people or things, and connections that help individuals enter, gain power in, or otherwise leverage social networks.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social class</span> or <span class="color">socioeconomic status</span></b> an individual&#x2019;s position in a stratified social order.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social cohesion</span></b> social bonds; how well people relate to each other and get along on a day-to-day basis.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social construction</span></b> an entity that exists because people behave as if it exists and whose existence is perpetuated as people and social institutions act in accordance with the widely agreed-upon formal rules or informal norms of behavior associated with that entity.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social control</span></b> mechanisms that create normative compliance in individuals.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social Darwinism</span></b> the application of Darwinian ideas to society&#x2014;namely, the evolutionary &#x201C;survival of the fittest.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social deviance</span></b> any transgression of socially established norms.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social equality</span></b> a condition in which no differences in wealth, power, prestige, or status based on nonnatural conventions exist.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social institution</span></b> a complex group of interdependent positions that, together, perform a social role and reproduce themselves over time; also defined in a narrow sense as any institution in a society that works to shape the behavior of the groups or people within it.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social integration</span></b> how well you are integrated into your social group or community.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social mobility</span></b> the movement between different positions within a system of social stratification in any given society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social movement</span></b> collective behavior that is purposeful, organized, and institutionalized but not ritualized.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social movement organization</span></b> a group developed to recruit new members and coordinate participation in a particular social movement; these groups also often raise money, clarify goals, and structure participation in the movement.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social network</span></b> a set of relations&#x2014;essentially, a set of dyads&#x2014;held together by ties between individuals.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social regulation</span></b> the number of rules guiding your daily life and, more specifically, what you can reasonably expect from the world on a day-to-day basis.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Social rights</span></b> the rights guaranteeing a citizen&#x2019;s protection by the state.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Socialism</span></b> an economic system in which most or all of the needs of the population are met through nonmarket methods of distribution.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Socialization</span></b> the process by which individuals internalize the values, beliefs, and norms of a given society and learn to function as members of that society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Socioeconomic status</span></b> <i>see</i> social class.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sociological imagination</span></b> the ability to connect the most basic, intimate aspects of an individual&#x2019;s life to seemingly impersonal and remote historical forces.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Sociology</span></b> the study of human society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Soft power</span></b> power attained through the use of cultural attractiveness rather than the threat of coercive action (hard power).</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Specialization</span></b> the process of breaking up work into specific, delimited tasks.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">State</span></b> as defined by Max Weber, &#x201C;a human community that (successfully) claims the <i>monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force</i> within a given territory.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Status</span></b> a recognizable social position that an individual occupies.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Status hierarchy system</span></b> a system of stratification based on social prestige.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Status set</span></b> all the statuses one holds simultaneously.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Status-attainment model</span></b> approach that ranks individuals by socioeconomic status, including income and educational attainment, and seeks to specify the attributes characteristic of people who end up in more desirable occupations.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-12" title="A-12"></span><b><span class="color">Stereotype threat</span></b> when members of a negatively stereotyped group are placed in a situation where they fear they may confirm those stereotypes.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Stigma</span></b> a negative social label that not only changes others&#x2019; behavior toward a person but also alters that person&#x2019;s own self-concept and social identity.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Straight-line assimilation</span></b> Robert Parks&#x2019;s 1920 universal and linear model for how immigrants assimilate: They first arrive, then settle in, and achieve full assimilation in a newly homogenous country.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Strain theory</span></b> Robert Merton&#x2019;s theory that deviance occurs when a society does not give all of its members equal ability to achieve socially acceptable goals.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Street crime</span></b> crime committed in public and often associated with violence, gangs, and poverty.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Strength of weak ties</span></b> the notion that relatively weak ties often turn out to be quite valuable because they yield new information.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Structural functionalism</span></b> theoretical tradition claiming that every society has certain structures (the family, the division of labor, or gender) that exist to fulfill some set of necessary functions (reproduction of the species, production of goods, etc.).</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Structural hole</span></b> a gap between network clusters, or even two individuals, if those individuals (or clusters) have complementary resources.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Structural mobility</span></b> mobility that is inevitable from changes in the economy.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Subaltern</span></b> a subordinate, oppressed group of people.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Subculture</span></b> the distinct cultural values and behavioral patterns of a particular group in society; a group united by sets of concepts, values, symbols, and shared meaning specific to the members of that group distinctive enough to distinguish it from others within the same culture or society.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Supernatural compensators</span></b> promises of future rewards, such as salvation or eternity in heaven.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Survey</span></b> an ordered series of questions intended to elicit information from respondents.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Symbolic ethnicity</span></b> a nationality, not in the sense of carrying the rights and duties of citizenship but identifying with a past or future nationality. For later generations of white ethnics, something not constraining but easily expressed, with no risks of stigma and all the pleasures of feeling like an individual.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Symbolic interactionism</span></b> a micro-level theory in which shared meanings, orientations, and assumptions form the basic motivations behind people&#x2019;s actions.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">T</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Taylorism</span></b> the methods of labor management introduced by Frederick Winslow Taylor to streamline the processes of mass production in which each worker repeatedly performs one specific task.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color"><i>Tertius gaudens</i></span></b> the member of a triad who benefits from conflict between the other two members of the group.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Theism</span></b> the worship of a god or gods, as in Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Tie</span></b> the connection between two people in a relationship that varies in strength from one relationship to the next; a story that explains our relationship with another member of our network.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color"><i>Total institution</i></span></b> an institution in which one is totally immersed and that controls all the basics of day-to-day life; no barriers exist between the usual spheres of daily life, and all activity occurs in the same place and under the same single authority.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Tracking</span></b> a way of dividing students into different classes by ability or future plans.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Traditional authority</span></b> authority that rests on appeals to the past or traditions.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Triad</span></b> a group of three.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">U</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Underclass</span></b> the notion, building on the culture of poverty argument, that the poor not only are different from mainstream society in their inability to take advantage of what society has to offer, but also are increasingly deviant and even dangerous to the rest of us.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-13" title="A-13"></span><b><span class="color">Union</span></b> an organization of workers designed to facilitate collective bargaining with an employer.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Union busting</span></b> a company&#x2019;s assault on its workers&#x2019; union with the hope of dissolving it.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Upper class</span></b> a term for the economic elite.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">V</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Validity</span></b> the extent to which an instrument measures what it is intended to measure.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Values</span></b> moral beliefs.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color"><i>Verstehen</i></span></b> German for &#x201C;understanding.&#x201D; The concept of <i>Verstehen</i> comes from Max Weber and is the basis of interpretive sociology in which researchers imagine themselves experiencing the life positions of the social actors they want to understand rather than treating those people as objects to be examined.</p>
<h3 class="bmhead">W</h3>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Wealth</span></b> a family&#x2019;s or individual&#x2019;s net worth (that is, total assets minus total debts).</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">Welfare state</span></b> a system in which the state is responsible for the well-being of its citizens.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><b><span class="color">White-collar crime</span></b> offense committed by a professional (or professionals) against a corporation, agency, or other institution.<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageA-14" title="A-14"></span></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<script>if (window.parent != null) if (window.parent.Ebook != null) if (window.parent.Ebook.section_loaded != null) window.parent.Ebook.section_loaded(window);</script></body>
</html>
